Testing, testing, this is a test, this is a test.
Let me just stop. That's quite okay. Today's
interview is with Brigadier General Travis M.
Hetherington. Today's Tuesday, August 12, 1980.
Let's start with your upbringing. You were born in
Reagan, Texas, February 20, 1908. Can you tell us
about your father? Well, my dad... My mother and
dad lived on a farm south of Reagan, Texas, about
two miles. And my father was born in Alabama, and he
came to Texas with my grandmother and grandfather
when he was about four years old. And they settled
in Falls County, along with around six brothers
and two sisters. Why'd they come from Alabama?
Well, it's hard to say. I mean, I don't really know.
It seemed to me in visiting Monroeville, Alabama,
where my dad was born, that everybody was going to
new territories, getting new land and
that was just the way it was. Now why they came to
Falls County I don't know because it seemed to me
that Falls County is probably the poorest part of
Texas. And of course after the war, after the Civil
War, apparently the schools were all broken And my
dad, well, I think he went through the eighth grade
or something of this sort. And the same thing
applied to my mother. How many acres did your
father have on his ranch? Well, he had, oh, I think
around 290 acres. It was really a farm. It was a
cotton and corn farm. Okay, cotton and corn. Let me
start. Okay, we're doing fine as far as that's
concerned now. 290 acres, what kind of livelihood
could you make off that? Well, it was very nice as
far as I was concerned. I had two brothers and two
sisters. I had one older brother who was about 15
months older than I, and then I had a younger
brother that was about three years younger than I.
And of course when you have your own cows and your
own meat and your own hogs and your own vegetable
garden and why there isn't much to buy other than
sugar and at one time why we even had sugar cane on
the farm and we
had a cane mill and a horse drawn with one horse
running around and so we ran the cane through the
press and then we cooked it out and made syrup. And
of course
my dad peddled beef on almost every Saturday. When
I was growing up we would slaughter a yearling on
Friday afternoon, Friday night, cut it up, and
then he would take it to Reagan in a horse-drawn
wagon. He had a beef enclosure on the back, and he
just paled his beef. Now this is a time, a little bit
earlier than this, was the time of populism. and
populism was a fairly strong force in Texas. Did he
ever talk about politics and populism? No, no. You
never discussed politics? No, no. I think he was
more concerned about making a living. Sure. And we
really never did get into any big discussion about
politics. Of course, later on, when John L. Lewis
was a strong man in the coal miner being chief of the
coal mine union while he was very verbose and being
against the coal miners and things of this sort,
trying to get more money when he thought everybody
should
make a living off the land, I guess. What kind of
education did he have? I don't really remember,
but I'm sure he only went through about sixth or
seventh grade.
He was very good at mathematics and being a
merchant type of thing. He was very, very honest.
As far as I know, he never cheated anybody out of a
nickel. He was very, very honest.
and of course he peddled his watermelons. I mean he
loved to go to town and he loved to talk, so
everybody knew him of course. And he had a lot of
good friends in the buy-in, Mr. Robbins in the
blacksmith shop and Mr. Wesley Shonfield who was
in the grocery business.
Now, you have a master's degree in business. Did he
ever stress education with you? Well, both my
mother and dad and us growing up, their objective
was that we graduate from high school. I mean, that
was really their objective. They insisted that we
were going to stay in school if it took us 25 years to
do it, to graduate from high school. And then, of
course, when I graduated from high school, He
said, this is where I stop and you begin. And he
said, if you ever need some money and need to borrow
some money to do whatever you want to do, he would go
on my note, but as far as he would go.
So they insisted we go to Ann also. Mother was
primarily the individual who saw that we got our
lessons. And of course, she helped us out as long as
we were in the lower grades. But when we got in the
higher grades, it got beyond her capability,
although she was well-read. I mean, she read
everything she'd get her hands on. She wasn't
really educated as far as mathematics and algebra
and all that type of thing was concerned. Let's
talk about the farm for a minute. You raised
cotton. Did you have sharecroppers on to do this,
or did you do it yourselves? No, we did this
ourselves. In our younger years, we had what I call
old Lewis and Liza.
He was quite a character. He had been in jail a
number of times. And he had around his wrist, just
like the palm of your hand, and around his ankles,
just like the palm of your hand. It was where he had
had chains on. And he had one ear that had been
bitten off while he was in jail. Bitten off? Bitten
off, yeah. Pretty mean jail. Well, that's right.
Somebody was hungry. Well, he'd gotten in a fight.
But anyway, he had gotten out. Are you a coffee
drinker? Please. And so he worked in Chopcott, and
he was a real good—
I mean, he was a real good worker. I mean, boy, he
could just kind of—and so he kind of took care of us
boys. And the thing that you remember is going down
to his house and sitting on his front porch eating
cheese and crackers and lemonade, yeah. Well, at
least he liked to work.
So the things you remember is a very strange thing
because I said go down to his house and he had
probably a one-room or two-room cabin that was on
the place. It was on your father's farm? Yeah.
He was a sharecropper. Well, he didn't really
share. He worked by the day. He was a day worker. He
was a day worker.
Paul, I don't know, Dad paid him so much money.
hundred pounds of cotton he picked or so much per
day. And gave him a place to stay? And gave him a
place to stay. And
of course he was an alcoholic. I mean they were
saying tonight why he was going to get drunk and you
knew that, but the rest of the week why he was just as
good as you could find anywhere. But your father
got in the wagon and went after him every time he
didn't show up. He found him in town drunk in jail or
something.
Why was he in jail to begin with? Why was he in
prison? Oh, I think he had killed somebody.
But as far as we were concerned, as far as I was
concerned, as far as my dad was concerned, he was
just as safe as you could find. What did you learn
from this man? Well, I would say that you learned
how to work. Well, I don't know if you learned a lot,
but the fact that he got out and I don't know if he was
married or not, he at least lived with somebody.
But anyway,
he could chop cotton and so he was always out in
front of us boys. Do you remember what you thought
of him? Well, what I thought of him, I just thought
he was a fine individual. And I think that your
compassion for individuals who are not as
straight in there as you are is increased.
I think maybe that's what you, starting out your
early life, I think that probably is It helps you
out in your later... Did your relationship with
him have any impact on your later thoughts about
black Americans? No, I don't... I think in growing
up, why... Well, I think it shows that everybody's
not all bad or all good. I mean, even that man was not
all bad. Well, later on, I mean, the... The boys who
lived closest to us were,
their last name was Cross. George and I and his two
oldest boys were about the same age and they always
came up and we played together and made toys out of
corn cobs. And later on, when we got a little wagon
or tricycle, we rode it down the hill that was next
to our house. And I think it was no different from
what you, the integration type of thing. In fact, I
think it was. So the Crosses were a black family?
Oh, yeah. Yeah. And he later on became a
sharecropper for us, for my dad. And because we had
moved from where I was born to the house where my
grandmother and grandmother, grandfather and
grandmother, mother Hetherington had lived. And
when they passed away, by then my dad moved into
their house and the Crosses moved into where we
lived.
I think it developed the fact that you had no
animosity against color or because they were, as
far as I was concerned, just as equal as we were. And
they played with us, our toys, and we played with
their toys. So you grew up in an integrated society
then, unlike so many other Texans. Well, you do
because you're in a little small town. We were out
and on a farm. And
we of course had the Kirkpatricks that lived right
up the street from us and they were white and we
probably had a total of around four or five boys who
were in the same age group as we, so we played with
them. And we played with them. You were really
younger when you were in the five, six, seven,
eight year old.
You were playing with the crosses and what have
you. But later on, when you got to be a teenager, we
had about six. boys that we went hunting together
and chased jackrabbits and went duck hunting, all
this type of
thing. Many people grow up in a society that has
both races, especially in the South, yet they
don't grow up to have feelings and that you've
expressed, that is, that they're just as equal as
we were. How can you account for the feeling that
you obtained? Well, I think it's the same today. My
grandchildren are in school
with your And they make no difference or
differentiation between whether or not the
individual is white or whether or not he's black.
Do you think your father, your parents had
anything to do with your attitudes? Well, I would
say so. I mean, there's no question about it. If
they had talked about or downgraded the Lewis, old
Lewis, or if they were afraid of him, or if they ever
expressed any
animosity towards him. But as far as my dad was
concerned, as far as my mother was concerned, they
really didn't make any difference between them.
Okay, let's talk about your mother. Did you tell me
about her? Well, she was born in Texas. Her father
had come from, well, we're trying to find out. We
think Kentucky, Paducah, Kentucky. And they had
moved to Roberson County, which is next door to
Falls County. And she was the youngest, I think, of
a big family. She had about, I don't know if I'd have
to count them, seven brothers and one sister. And
she grew up around Bremont, which is about six,
eight miles from there. And then, I don't know how
my mother and dad met, but anyway,
they were married, I guess, in around 1905 or
somewhere along that. What kind of person was she?
What kind of personality or character was she? Oh,
she was a real strong individual. I
would say
she was a dominating type of individual.
a type of individual that wouldn't hold us kids
back. I mean, when we graduated from high school, a
lot of mothers hang on. But whatever we decided to
do, that was all right with her. And
she expressed her opinion
quite readily. And so... And she kept house and I
don't ever remember her working in the fields at
all. She took care of
cooking the meals and cleaning the house and
keeping her clothes clean and things of this sort.
And my dad took care of providing for us all. Now you
say she was a strong individual. Would you
consider her the authority in the household?
Well, I think to keep peace in the family, I think my
dad gave in a lot.
They really didn't fight very much. I mean, it was
rather calm. But she was always saying, George, do
this. George, do that. or George bring in the
vegetables. Who had the final word? Well, I don't
know. It's hard to say whether she had a final word
or not, but
she always had her own couple of cows. that she sold
a year and got herself some money, which was her
money. Oh, really? That's kind of unusual back in
the early 1900s, isn't it? So she raised her own
cattle right there? Well, he took care of them, of
course, but she had her own cows, and there was only
about two or three. she didn't accumulate a lot of
money. And then of course she loved flowers, so she
could spend her egg money and her cow money on
whatever she wanted to. And so she bought flowers
and flower seeds and pots and this type of thing. So
she worked in the yard.
And she sold and
made a lot of things for for the for us boys and also
for our my sisters as when they grew up. What about
your father? What kind of personality or
character was he? Well very kind, very I would say
very generous. Never really raised a lot of heck. I
mean far as Spankin's a concern. There's very few,
I'd say. Not that we didn't need them. We all need
them. No, I would say we had a very calm household.
Okay, let's look at it this way. You've had a very
successful career. In which ways would you
consider that your parents were responsible for
that? Well, I would say insisting on going to
school, that we attend school, not play hooky. You
and Dad not play hooky.
And met reasonably good grades. They really
didn't push us as far as making A's or B's or C's as
long as we passed. And they always said that if we
ever got a whipping at school, we were going to get
another one at home.
I only got one whipping at school and they never
knew about it. So
I would say insisting on us getting through high
school and then after getting through high school
not really voicing any objection for permitting
me to do whatever I wanted to do.
And I figured, well of course when you are growing
up, why your main objective is to graduate my
school, you figure that when you graduate my
school that would be all the education that you'd
ever want or need. And of course after graduating
and then along came the fall while I was ready to go
to school, so I went to Tyler Commercial College.
which is about a seven month course, and my dad went
on a note at the First National Bank of Reagan,
Texas for the tuition, and I went over and entered
school. Now my older brother, after he graduated
from high school, he stayed at home and worked on
the farm for a year. you were really torn as to
whether or not you should do the same thing. Well, I
didn't. I decided I was going to have to go to Tyler
Commercial College. And of course, in those days,
I rode a train from Reagan to Tyler, and I think that
was probably the first time I'd ever been on a
train. And in those days, I'm sure you understand
that Well, I imagine I was fourteen before my dad
got his first automobile, so your severe of
activity was really within about three or four
miles of home. Right. And
so the first time I ever visited Hearn, which is
only thirty miles away, was after my dad got an
automobile when I was about fifteen. And
Marlin, Texas, which was about 12 miles away, you
never got up there. And then after he got an
automobile, then we went to the movies in Marlin.
But I would say that primarily is the fact that they
insisted on us getting an education through high
school. the second thing is is not interfere with
uh with our activities or what we want to do
afterwards okay okay now you had two brothers two
sisters right how'd you get along with them oh real
well i mean we uh my three brothers my two brothers
and i uh well we slept in the same bed for uh I guess
until we were twelve or thirteen. And of course my
younger brother was, after I left home,
the year after I left home, he was killed on a hay
rake. And I was working at that time for Lawrence
Grocery Company. And of course your sisters, they
were much younger and therefore I
guess you got along just about as well as any
teenage boy gets along with kid sisters. They
always, my oldest sister,
I think she was born in about 1915,
and so I was about seven I guess when she was born.
The only thing I can remember about her is she
always wanted the neck of a chicken, but she
wouldn't eat the neck, the first piece. It was
always the last piece. So we were always
scrambling for the neck, but that was her piece of
chicken.
But otherwise, by the time I was graduating from
high school, she was just entering school. So
there's a large age difference. Well, we thought
it was a large age difference, but now it's really
not a large age difference. Many generals that
I've talked to have expressed episodes in their
early lives that they thought had a significant
impact on their later career. Do you have any
episodes that might have had an impact on you?
Well, I would say that probably the character that
your mother and dad has affects your life a lot. I
mean, I think that my dad being completely honest
with all his dealings, didn't cheat anybody out of
anything. He loved to work. And I think that the
fact that he teaches you honesty and integrity and
willingness to work, I think this is a big
influence. I mean, I think it's a shame today that
your young boys can't get a job and work.
Yesterday, I was talking to a 16-year-old boy, He
just couldn't get a job anywhere. By the time I was
16,
I was picking 200 pounds of cotton a day. And
although you weren't getting a lot of allowances
out of it, and you weren't being paid for doing it by
the fact that he at least taught you that you liked
to work. And I think maybe I'm a workaholic. Sure.
And I think that's your upbringing and your
honesty that when you say something why you mean it
and things of this sort.
Did religion play a role in your early life? Well I
would say religion
the only activities
that you had out of your home was
your Baptist young people's programs on Sunday
evening.
My mother was a primitive Baptist and my father was
a missionary Baptist. So we joined the missionary
Baptist church and we normally attended the
church on our own, really, except my mother's
church every fourth Sunday, normally. Of course,
primitive Baptists are very primitive in their
religion. They don't have pianos, as you might
know. And they liked to sing, and the preachers
liked to talk. And I can remember sometimes it
would be three preachers preaching. The last guy
would get up and say, I'm not going to say anything.
But an hour later, he was still talking. And also,
normally, mother and dad would bring home a big
crowd of people.